---
layout: default
tags: programming
---

**Note**: This article mostly applies to Neovim however with the semi-recent release of Vim 8, a large portion of this is applicable to Vim too!


## Please go Async

Neovim and Vim8 both have support for asynchronous operations.
With that in mind I'd opt-in to the async variants of plugins where you can.

Use syntastic? Try Neomake.
Use supertab? Try Deoplete.

You get the idea...

## Netrw isn't (that) terrible
Both Neovim and Vim come with Netrw, a package for exploring files.
Setting a few configuration options will make it behave as you'd expect a conventional explorer to behave.

```
let g:netrw_liststyle = 3    "style it as a tree
let g:netrw_banner = 0     "Hide the banner
let g:netrw_winsize = -40" set an absolute size of 40 (negative means absolute for Netrw) for the window
```
(image: screenshot_2017-05-10_12-48-22.png)

For a complete list  of the plethora of configurable options:
```
:help netrw-browser-settings
```

If you're willing to compromise a little you can ditch Nerd Tree and retain a ton of the features.

## Live substitution

Neovim comes with live substitution and it's quite incredible. It's better explained with a GIF.

(image: inccommand-demo.gif)
To enable it, simply do:
```
set inccommand = split
```

No more dodgy regex replacements, you can sanity check everything!


## Packages

I recommend [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug) for managing your plugins.
If you're feeling ballsy, Vim8 (Not Neovim) has its own package manager.
With Vim Plug Installing a package is as simple as
```
Plug 'mhinz/vim-grepper'
```

On that note, here are a few plugins that I use on a daily basis and would recommend to others

### Ctrlp
GIF OF CTRLP IN ACTION

I've got a confession to make here, I actually prefer Command-t. Command-t is **way** faster and smoother but comes at a cost of installation being a slight faff. 

Ctrlp's installation is painless  
```
Plug 'ctrlpvim/ctrlp.vim'
```
No configuration. This wins for me at the expense of speed.

Ctrlp is a fuzzy finder for files and does what it says on the tin. One particular option that people seem to neglect is the `:CtrlpBufTag` which basically shows all the symbols for the file you're currently in.

GIF OF CTRLPBUFTAG

### vim-grepper
(image: grepper-demo.gif)

I find this plugin essential for navigating large codebases, I use git as my `grepprg` of choice and have a few config options which make it behave more to my liking (and actually quite similar to Sublime unintentionally).

```
nnoremap <leader>f :Grepper -tool git -grepprg git grep -nIi<cr>

let g:grepper.dir = 'repo'      "scan from the top of our repo
let g:grepper.highlight = 1     "highlight matches
let g:grepper.simple_prompt = 1 "Remove the noise from the prompt
let g:grepper.side = 1          "open a new buffer with some context
```

### neomake

### deoplete
(image: deoplete-demo.gif)

### vim-fugitive

### vim-surround



## Terminal
(image: terminal-demo.gif)

Terminal hotkeys are a bit 'meh' and strange so I've remapped them to this

```
EXAMPLE
```

Goodbye tmux!

## Statuslines

You probably don't need a statusline*. You can get a usable one with minimal configuration

 ```
set statusline=%{fugitive#statusline()}%=%t[%04l,%04v]
hi StatusLine ctermbg=white ctermfg=blue
```
Renders as
(image: status-demo.png)

* Those of you with a keen eye may have noticed a fancier statusline in some of my gifs. This has been removed in favour of minimalism.

## Ditch dumb defaults

Neovim has tons of the sensible options enabled by default so remove them from your vimrc now!
See `:help nvim-defaults` for a complete list. Personally I have removed the following (and you should too!)

```
syntax on

set filetype plugin indent on
set backspace=indent,eol,start "Make backspace behave like everywhere else
set hlsearch "Highlight matching searches		
set incsearch "highlight them as they're typed as well		
set wildmenu "Show completions in a bar				
set ruler "Show our current position		
```
