---
layout: default
tags: [project, programming]
---
# Entree

## What is it?

[Entree](https://github.com/joereynolds/entree) is something I brewed up in my spare time over the course of 2 evenings.

It utilises the [entr](http://www.entrproject.org/) watcher which if you haven't heard of it, is a very
simple and lightweight way to watch for changes and do something on change.

Entree was partially inspired by [funzzy](https://github.com/cristianoliveira/funzzy). I saw that they were versioning their watchers and realised that's something I wanted too, but I wanted it with `entr`.

While I do have a slight love for Rust (what funzzy is written in), I didn't want to use yet another reinvention of the wheel.
`entr` has been around for a while and is battle-tested. Besides that, my attempts with funzzy were not so funzzy.

## How does it work?

It has a file named an `.entreerc` which follows a very strict format of    

```
[watcher-name]
find . | entr stuff
```

i.e. 

The watcher name on one line, and the command on the next line.

My `.entreerc` looks like this, it's very small because I don't actually use many watchers...heh.

```
[mort-test-integration]
rg '' -l | entr npm run build && mort -f test/fixtures/no-usages.css

[detect-dead-css]
ls ~/programs/mort/test/fixtures/*.css | entr mort -vvf /_
```

The code for entree is written in bash which allows some pretty beautiful things to happen.
I get some nice [tab-completion](https://github.com/joereynolds/entree/blob/master/entree_completion) 
<span class="sidenote">This was actually my first time making anything with tab-completion and it was much easier than I thought, I managed to get command completion and sub-command completion in</span>,
a very easy [installation process](https://github.com/joereynolds/entree/blob/master/install.sh) and of course,
the powers of the shell!

One of the nicer things about using the shell for this is I automatically get arguments injected into the command,
meaning that all of my watchers are now able to take command line arguments.

e.g.

```
[watcher-name]
find . | entr $2
```

Running this with: 
```
entree watch watcher-name ls
```

Will execute `ls` on every change of the current directory, pretty neat and very modular.

## Why would I ever want this?

If you constantly spin up the same watchers, and want to share them across machines, then you probably
want a way of remembering your watchers, that's what this is.
